DON’T SEEK YOUR SELF IN THE MIND
I feel that there is still a great deal I need to learn about the workings
of my mind before I can get anywhere near full consciousness or
spiritual enlightenment.
No, you don’t. The problems of the mind cannot be solved on the level
of the mind. Once you have understood the basic dysfunction, there
isn’t really much else that you need to learn or understand. Studying
the complexities of the mind may make you a good psychologist, but
doing so won’t take you beyond the mind, just as the study of
madness isn’t enough to create sanity. You have already understood
the basic mechanics of the unconscious state: identification with the
mind, which creates a false self, the ego, as a substitute for your true
self rooted in Being. You become as a "branch cut off from the vine,"
as Jesus puts it.
The ego’s needs are endless. It feels vulnerable and threatened and
so lives in a state of fear and want. Once you know how the basic
dysfunction operates, there is no need to explore all its countless
manifestations, no need to make it into a complex personal problem.
The ego, of course, loves that. It is always seeking for something to
attach itself to in order to uphold and strengthen its illusory sense of
self, and it will readily attach itself to your problems. This is why, for
so many people, a large part of their sense of self is intimately
connected with their problems. Once this has happened, the last thing
they want is to become free of them; that would mean loss of self.
There can be a great deal of unconscious ego investment in pain and
suffering.
So once you recognize the root of unconsciousness as identification
with the mind, which of course includes the emotions, you step out of
it. You become present. When you are present, you can allow the
mind to be as it is without getting entangled in it. The mind in itself is
not dysfunctional. It is a wonderful tool. Dysfunction sets in when you
seek your self in it and mistake it for who you are. It then becomes
the egoic mind and takes over your whole life.
END THE DELUSION OF TIME
It seems almost impossible to disidentify from the mind. We are all
immersed in it. How do you teach a fish to fly?
Here is the key: End the delusion of time. Time and mind are
inseparable. Remove time from the mind and it stops - unless you
choose to use it.
To be identified with your mind is to be trapped in time: the
compulsion to live almost exclusively through memory and
anticipation. This creates an endless preoccupation with past and
future and an unwillingness to honor and acknowledge the present
moment and allow it to be. The compulsion arises because the past
gives you an identity and the future holds the promise of salvation, of
fulfillment in whatever form. Both are illusions.
But without a sense of time, how would we function in this world?
There would be no goals to strive toward anymore. I wouldn’t even
know who I am, because my past makes me who I am today. I think
time is something very precious, and we need to learn to use it wisely
rather than waste it.
Time isn’t precious at all, because it is an illusion. What you perceive

 as precious is not time but the one point that is out of time: the Now.
That is precious indeed. The more you are focused on time - past
and future - the more you miss the Now, the most precious thing
there is.
Why is it the most precious thing? Firstly, because it is the only thing.
It’s all there is. The eternal present is the space within which your
whole life unfolds, the one factor that remains constant. Life is now.
There was never a time when your life was not now, nor will there
ever be. Secondly, the Now is the only point that can take you beyond
the limited confines of the mind. It is your only point of access into
the timeless and formless realm of Being.

NOTHING EXISTS OUTSIDE THE NOW
Aren’t past and future just as real, sometimes even more real, than
the present? After all, the past determines who we are, as well as
how we perceive and behave in the present. And our future goals
determine which actions we take in the present.
You haven’t yet grasped the essence of what I am saying because you
are trying to understand it mentally. The mind cannot understand this.
Only you can. Please just listen.
Have you ever experienced, done, thought, or felt anything outside
the Now? Do you think you ever will? Is it possible for anything to
happen or be outside the Now? The answer is obvious, is it not?
Nothing ever happened in the past; it happened in the Now.
Nothing will ever happen in the future; it will happen in the Now.
What you think of as the past is a memory trace, stored in the mind,
of a former Now. When you remember the past, you reactivate a

 memory trace - and you do so now. The future is an imagined Now,
a projection of the mind. When the future comes, it comes as the
Now. When you think about the future, you do it now. Past and future
obviously have no reality of their own. Just as the moon has no light
of its own, but can only reflect the light of the sun, so are past and
future only pale reflections of the light, power, and reality of the
eternal present. Their reality is "borrowed" from the Now.
The essence of what I am saying here cannot be understood by the
mind. The moment you grasp it, there is a shift in consciousness from
mind to Being, from time to presence. Suddenly, everything feels
alive, radiates energy, emanates Being.

THE KEY TO THE SPIRITUAL DIMENSION
In life-threatening emergency situations, the shift in consciousness
from time to presence sometimes happens naturally. The personality
that has a past and a future momentarily recedes and is replaced by
an intense conscious presence, very still but very alert at the same
time. Whatever response is needed then arises out of that state of
consciousness.
The reason why some people love to engage in dangerous activities,
such as mountain climbing, car racing, and so on, although they may
not be aware of it, is that it forces them into the Now - that intensely
alive state that is free of time, free of problems, free of thinking, free
of the burden of the personality. Slipping away from the present
moment even for a second may mean death. Unfortunately, they
come to depend on a particular activity to be in that state. But you
don’t need to climb the north face of the Eiger. You can enter that
state now.

 Since ancient times, spiritual masters of all traditions have pointed to
the Now as the key to the spiritual dimension. Despite this, it seems
to have remained a secret. It is certainly not taught in churches and
temples. If you go to a church, you may hear readings from the
Gospels such as "Take no thought for the morrow; for the morrow
shall take thought for the things of itself," or "Nobody who puts his
hands to the plow and looks back is fit for the Kingdom of God." Or
you might hear the passage about the beautiful flowers that are not
anxious about tomorrow but live with ease in the timeless Now and
are provided for abundantly by God. The depth and radical nature of
these teachings are not recognized. No one seems to realize that they
are meant to be lived and so bring about a profound inner
transformation.

The whole essence of Zen consists in walking along the razor’s edge
of Now - to be so utterly, so completely present that no problem, no
suffering, nothing that is not who you are in your essence, can survive
in you. In the Now, in the absence of time, all your problems dissolve.
Suffering needs time; it cannot survive in the Now.
The great Zen master Rinzai, in order to take his students’ attention
away from time, would often raise his finger and slowly ask: "What, at
this moment, is lacking?" A powerful question that does not require an
answer on the level of the mind. It is designed to take your attention
deeply into the Now. A similar question in the Zen tradition is this: "If
not now, when?"

 The Now is also central to the teaching of Sufism, the mystical branch
of Islam. Sufis have a saying: "The Sufi is the son of time present."
And Rumi, the great poet and teacher of Sufism, declares: "Past and
future veil God from our sight; burn up both of them with fire."
Meister Eckhart, the thirteenth-century spiritual teacher, summed it all
up beautifully: "Time is what keeps the light from reaching us. There
is no greater obstacle to God than time."

ACCESSING THE POWER OF THE NOW
A moment ago, when you talked about the eternal present and the
unreality of past and future, I found myself looking at that tree
outside the window. I had looked at it a few times before, but this
time it was different. The external perception had not changed much,
except that the colors seemed brighter and more vibrant. But there
was now an added dimension to it. This is hard to explain. I don’t
know how, but I was aware of something invisible that I felt was the
essence of that tree, its inner spirit, if you like. And somehow I was
part of that. I realize now that I hadn’t truly seen the tree before, just
a flat and dead image of it. When I look at the tree now, some of that
awareness is still present, but I can feel it slipping away. You see, the
experience is already receding into the past. Can something like this
ever be more than a fleeting glimpse?
You were free of time for a moment. You moved into the Now and
therefore perceived the tree without the screen of mind. The
awareness of Being became part of your perception. With the timeless
dimension comes a different kind of knowing, one that does not "kill"
the spirit that lives within every creature and every thing. A knowing
that does not destroy the sacredness and mystery of life but contains

 a deep love and reverence for all that is. A knowing of which the mind
knows nothing.
The mind cannot know the tree. It can only know facts or information
about the tree. My mind cannot know you, only labels, judgments,
facts, and opinions about you. Being alone knows directly.
There is a place for mind and mind knowledge. It is in the practical
realm of day-to-day living. However, when it takes over all aspects of
your life, including your relationships with other human beings and
with nature, it becomes a monstrous parasite that, unchecked, may
well end up killing all life on the planet and finally itself by killing its
host.
You have had a glimpse of how the timeless can transform your
perceptions. But an experience is not enough, no matter how
beautiful or profound. What is needed and what we are concerned
with is a permanent shift in consciousness.
So break the old pattern of present-moment denial and presentmoment resistance. Make it your practice to withdraw attention from
past and future whenever they are not needed. Step out of the time
dimension as much as possible in everyday life. If you find it hard to
enter the Now directly, start by observing the habitual tendency of
your mind to want to escape from the Now. You will observe that the
future is usually imagined as either better or worse than the present.
If the imagined future is better, it gives you hope or pleasurable
anticipation. If it is worse, it creates anxiety. Both are illusory.
Through self-observation, more presence comes into your life
automatically. The moment you realize you are not present, you are
present. Whenever you are able to observe your mind, you are no
longer trapped in it. Another factor has come in, something that is not
of the mind: the witnessing presence.
Be present as the watcher of your mind - of your thoughts and
emotions as well as your reactions in various situations. Be at least as
interested in your reactions as in the situation or person that causes
you to react. Notice also how often your attention is in the past or

 future. Don’t judge or analyze what you observe. Watch the thought,
feel the emotion, observe the reaction. Don’t make a personal
problem out of them. You will then feel something more powerful
than any of those things that you observe: the still, observing
presence itself behind the content of your mind, the silent watcher.

Intense presence is needed when certain situations trigger a reaction
with a strong emotional charge, such as when your self-image is
threatened, a challenge comes into your life that triggers fear, things
"go wrong," or an emotional complex from the past is brought up. In
those instances, the tendency is for you to become "unconscious." The
reaction or emotion takes you over - you "become" it. You act it out.
You justify, make wrong, attack, defend...except that it isn’t you, it’s
the reactive pattern, the mind in its habitual survival mode.
Identification with the mind gives it more energy; observation of the
mind withdraws energy from it. Identification with the mind creates
more time; observation of the mind opens up the dimension of the
timeless. The energy that is withdrawn from the mind turns into
presence. Once you can feel what it means to be present, it becomes
much easier to simply choose to step out of the time dimension
whenever time is not needed for practical purposes and move more
deeply into the Now. This does not impair your ability to use time -
past or future - when you need to refer to it for practical matters.
Nor does it impair your ability to use your mind. In fact, it enhances it.
When you do use your mind, it will be sharper, more focused.
LETTING GO OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TIME
Learn to use time in the practical aspects of your life - we may call
this "clock time" - but immediately return to present-moment
awareness when those practical matters have been dealt with. In this

 way, there will be no buildup of "psychological time," which is
identification with the past and continuous compulsive projection into
the future.
Clock time is not just making an appointment or planning a trip. It
includes learning from the past so that we don’t repeat the same
mistakes over and over. Setting goals and working toward them.
Predicting the future by means of patterns and laws, physical,
mathematical and so on, learned from the past and taking appropriate
action on the basis of our predictions.
But even here, within the sphere of practical living, where we cannot
do without reference to past and future, the present moment remains
the essential factor: Any lesson from the past becomes relevant and is
applied now. Any planning as well as working toward achieving a
particular goal is done now.
The enlightened person’s main focus of attention is always the Now,
but they are still peripherally aware of time. In other words, they
continue to use clock time but are free of psychological time.
Be alert as you practice this so that you do not unwittingly transform
clock time into psychological time. For example, if you made a
mistake in the past and learn from it now, you are using clock time.
On the other hand, if you dwell on it mentally, and self-criticism,
remorse, or guilt come up, then you are making the mistake into "me"
and "mine": You make it part of your sense of self, and it has become
psychological time, which is always linked to a false sense of identity.
Nonforgiveness necessarily implies a heavy burden of psychological
time.
If you set yourself a goal and work toward it, you are using clock time.
You are aware of where you want to go, but you honor and give your
fullest attention to the step that you are taking at this moment. If you
then become excessively focused on the goal, perhaps because you
are seeking happiness, fulfillment, or a more complete sense of self in
it, the Now is no longer honored. It becomes reduced to a mere
stepping stone to the future, with no intrinsic value. Clock time then

 turns into psychological time. Your life’s journey is no longer an
adventure, just an obsessive need to arrive, to attain, to "make it."
You no longer see or smell the flowers by the wayside either, nor are
you aware of the beauty and the miracle of life that unfolds all around
you when you are present in the Now.

I can see the supreme importance of the Now, but I cannot quite go
along with you when you say that time is a complete illusion.
When I say "time is an illusion," my intention is not to make a
philosophical statement. I am just reminding you of a simple fact - a
fact so obvious that you may find it hard to grasp and may even find it
meaningless - but once fully realized, it can cut like a sword through
all the mind-created layers of complexity and "problems." Let me say
it again: the present moment is all you ever have. There is never a
time when your life is not "this moment." Is this not a fact?
THE INSANITY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TIME
You will not have any doubt that psychological time is a mental
disease if you look at its collective manifestations. They occur, for
example, in the form of ideologies such as communism, national
socialism or any nationalism, or rigid religious belief systems, which
operate under the implicit assumption that the highest good lies in
the future and that therefore the end justifies the means. The end is
an idea, a point in the mind-projected future, when salvation in
whatever form - happiness, fulfillment, equality, liberation, and so on
- will be attained. Not infrequently, the means of getting there are
the enslavement, torture, and murder of people in the present.
For example, it is estimated that as many as fifty million people were
murdered to further the cause of communism, to bring about a "better

 world" in Russia, China, and other countries.2 This is a chilling
example of how belief in a future heaven creates a present hell. Can
there be any doubt that psychological time is a serious and dangerous
mental illness?
How does this mind pattern operate in your life? Are you always trying
to get somewhere other than where you are? Is most of your doing
just a means to an end? Is fulfillment always just around the corner or
confined to short-lived pleasures, such as sex, food, drink, drugs, or
thrills and excitement? Are you always focused on becoming,
achieving, and attaining, or alternatively chasing some new thrill or
pleasure? Do you believe that if you acquire more things you will
become more fulfilled, good enough, or psychologically complete? Are
you waiting for a man or woman to give meaning to your life?
In the normal, mind-identified or unenlightened state of
consciousness, the power and infinite creative potential that lie
concealed in the Now are completely obscured by psychological time.
Your life then loses its vibrancy, its freshness, its sense of wonder.
The old patterns of thought, emotion, behavior, reaction, and desire
are acted out in endless repeat performances, a script in your mind
that gives you an identity of sorts but distorts or covers up the reality
of the Now. The mind then creates an obsession with the future as an
escape from the unsatisfactory present.
NEGATIVITY AND SUFFERING HAVE THEIR ROOTS IN TIME
But the belief that the future will be better than the present is not
always an illusion. The present can be dreadful, and things can get
better in the future, and often they do.
Usually, the future is a replica of the past. Superficial changes are
possible, but real transformation is rare and depends upon whether
you can become present enough to dissolve the past by accessing the
power of the Now. What you perceive as future is an intrinsic part of
your state of consciousness now. If your mind carries a heavy burden

 of past, you will experience more of the same. The past perpetuates
itself through lack of presence. The quality of your consciousness at
this moment is what shapes the future - which, of course, can only
be experienced as the Now.
You may win ten million dollars, but that kind of change is no more
than skin deep. You would simply continue to act out the same
conditioned patterns in more luxurious surroundings. Humans have
learned to split the atom. Instead of killing ten or twenty people with
a wooden club, one person can now kill a million just by pushing a
button. Is that real change?
If it is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that
determines the future, then what is it that determines the quality of
your consciousness? Your degree of presence. So the only place where
true change can occur and where the past can be dissolved is the
Now.

All negativity is caused by an accumulation of psychological time and
denial of the present. Unease, anxiety, tension, stress, worry - all
forms of fear - are caused by too much future, and not enough
presence. Guilt, regret, resentment, grievances, sadness, bitterness,
and all forms of nonforgiveness are caused by too much past, and not
enough presence. Most people find it difficult to believe that a state of
consciousness totally free of all negativity is possible. And yet this is
the liberated state to which all spiritual teachings point. It is the
promise of salvation, not in an illusory future but right here and now.
You may find it hard to recognize that time is the cause of your
suffering or your problems. You believe that they are caused by
specific situations in your life, and seen from a conventional
viewpoint, this is true. But until you have dealt with the basic
problem-making dysfunction of the mind - its attachment to past and
future and denial of the Now - problems are actually

 interchangeable. If all your problems or perceived causes of suffering
or unhappiness were miraculously removed for you today, but you had
not become more present, more conscious, you would soon find
yourself with a similar set of problems or causes of suffering, like a
shadow that follows you wherever you go. Ultimately, there is only
one problem: the time-bound mind itself.
I cannot believe that I could ever reach a point where I am
completely free of my problems.
You are right. You can never reach that point because you are at that
point now.
There is no salvation in time. You cannot be free in the future.
Presence is the key to freedom, so you can only be free now.
FINDING THE LIFE UNDERNEATH YOUR LIFE SITUATION
I don’t see how I can be free now. As it happens, I am extremely
unhappy with my life at the moment. This is a fact, and I would be
deluding myself if I tried to convince myself that all is well when it
definitely isn’t. To me, the present moment is very unhappy; it is not
liberating at all. What keeps me going is the hope or possibility of
some improvement in the future.
You think that your attention is in the present moment when it’s
actually taken up completely by time. You cannot be both unhappy
and fully present in the Now.
What you refer to as your "life" should more accurately be called your
"life situation." It is psychological time: past and future. Certain things
in the past didn’t go the way you wanted them to go. You are still
resisting what happened in the past, and now you are resisting what
is. Hope is what keeps you going, but hope keeps you focused on the
future, and this continued focus perpetuates your denial of the Now
and therefore your unhappiness.

 It is true that my present life situation is the result of things that
happened in the past, but it is still my present situation, and being
stuck in it is what makes me unhappy.
Forget about your life situation for a while and pay attention to your
life.
What is the difference?
Your life situation exists in time.
Your life is now.
Your life situation is mind-stuff.
Your life is real.
Find the "narrow gate that leads to life." It is called the Now. Narrow
your life down to this moment. Your life situation may be full of
problems - most life situations are - but find out if you have any
problem at this moment. Not tomorrow or in ten minutes, but now. Do
you have a problem now?
When you are full of problems, there is no room for anything new to
enter, no room for a solution. So whenever you can, make some
room, create some space, so that you find the life underneath your
life situation.
Use your senses fully. Be where you are. Look around. Just look, don’t
interpret. See the light, shapes, colors, textures. Be aware of the
silent presence of each thing. Be aware of the space that allows
everything to be. Listen to the sounds; don’t judge them. Listen to the
silence underneath the sounds. Touch something - anything - and
feel and acknowledge its Being. Observe the rhythm of your
breathing; feel the air flowing in and out, feel the life energy inside
your body. Allow everything to be, within and without. Allow the
"isness" of all things. Move deeply into the Now.
You are leaving behind the deadening world of mental abstraction, of

 time. You are getting out of the insane mind that is draining you of
life energy, just as it is slowly poisoning and destroying the Earth. You
are awakening out of the dream of time into the present.

ALL PROBLEMS ARE ILLUSIONS OF THE MIND
It feels as if a heavy burden has been lifted. A sense of lightness. I
feel clear... but my problems are still there waiting for me, aren’t
they? They haven’t been solved. Am I not just temporarily evading
them?
If you found yourself in paradise, it wouldn’t be long before your mind
would say "yes, but... ." Ultimately, this is not about solving your
problems. It’s about realizing that there are no problems. Only
situations - to be dealt with now, or to be left alone and accepted as
part of the "isness" of the present moment until they change or can
be dealt with. Problems are mind-made and need time to survive.
They cannot survive in the actuality of the Now.
Focus your attention on the Now and tell me what problem you have
at this moment.

I am not getting any answer because it is impossible to have a
problem when your attention is fully in the Now. A situation that
needs to be either dealt with or accepted - yes. Why make it into a
problem? Why make anything into a problem? Isn’t life challenging
enough as it is? What do you need problems for? The mind
unconsciously loves problems because they give you an identity of

 sorts. This is normal, and it is insane. "Problem" means that you are
dwelling on a situation mentally without there being a true intention
or possibility of taking action now and that you are unconsciously
making it part of your sense of self. You become so overwhelmed by
your life situation that you lose your sense of life, of Being. Or you are
carrying in your mind the insane burden of a hundred things that you
will or may have to do in the future instead of focusing your attention
on the one thing that you can do now.
When you create a problem, you create pain. All it takes is a simple
choice, a simple decision: no matter what happens, I will create no
more pain for myself. I will create no more problems. Although it is a
simple choice, it is also very radical. You won’t make that choice
unless you are truly fed up with suffering, unless you have truly had
enough. And you won’t be able to go through with it unless you access
the power of the Now. If you create no more pain for yourself, then
you create no more pain for others. You also no longer contaminate
the beautiful Earth, your inner space, and the collective human psyche
with the negativity of problem-making.

If you have ever been in a life-or-death emergency situation, you will
know that it wasn’t a problem. The mind didn’t have time to fool
around and make it into a problem. In a true emergency, the mind
stops; you become totally present in the Now, and something
infinitely more powerful takes over. This is why there are many
reports of ordinary people suddenly becoming capable of incredibly
courageous deeds. In any emergency, either you survive or you don’t.
Either way, it is not a problem.
Some people get angry when they hear me say that problems are
illusions. I am threatening to take away their sense of who they are.
They have invested much time in a false sense of self. For many
years, they have unconsciously defined their whole identity in terms of

 their problems or their suffering. Who would they be without it?
A great deal of what people say, think, or do is actually motivated by
fear, which of course is always linked with having your focus on the
future and being out of touch with the Now. As there are no problems
in the Now, there is no fear either.
Should a situation arise that you need to deal with now, your action
will be clear and incisive if it arises out of present-moment awareness.
It is also more likely to be effective. It will not be a reaction coming
from the past conditioning of your mind but an intuitive response to
the situation. In other instances, when the time-bound mind would
have reacted, you will find it more effective to do nothing - just stay
centered in the Now.
A QUANTUM LEAP IN THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS
I have had glimpses of this state of freedom from mind and time that
you describe, but past and future are so overwhelmingly strong that I
cannot keep them out for long.
The time-bound mode of consciousness is deeply embedded in the
human psyche. But what we are doing here is part of a profound
transformation that is taking place in the collective consciousness of
the planet and beyond: the awakening of consciousness from the
dream of matter, form, and separation. The ending of time. We are
breaking mind patterns that have dominated human life for eons.
Mind patterns that have created unimaginable suffering on a vast
scale. I am not using the word evil. It is more helpful to call it
unconsciousness or insanity.
This breaking up of the old mode of consciousness or rather
unconsciousness: is it something we have to do or will it happen
anyway? I mean, is this change inevitable?
That’s a question of perspective. The doing and the happening is in

 fact a single process; because you are one with the totality of
consciousness, you cannot separate the two. But there is no absolute
guarantee that humans will make it. The process isn’t inevitable or
automatic. Your cooperation is an essential part of it. However you
look at it, it is a quantum leap in the evolution of consciousness, as
well as our only chance of survival as a race.
THE JOY OF BEING
To alert you that you have allowed yourself to be taken over by
psychological time, you can use a simple criterion. Ask yourself: Is
there joy, ease, and lightness in what I am doing? If there isn’t, then
time is covering up the present moment, and life is perceived as a
burden or a struggle.
If there is no joy, ease, or lightness in what you are doing, it does not
necessarily mean that you need to change what you are doing. It may
be sufficient to change the how. "How" is always more important than
"what." See if you can give much more attention to the doing than to
the result that you want to achieve through it. Give your fullest
attention to whatever the moment presents. This implies that you
also completely accept what is, because you cannot give your full
attention to something and at the same time resist it.
As soon as you honor the present moment, all unhappiness and
struggle dissolve, and life begins to flow with joy and ease. When you
act out of present-moment awareness, whatever you do becomes
imbued with a sense of quality, care, and love - even the most
simple action.

So do not be concerned with the fruit of your action - just give
attention to the action itself. The fruit will come of its own accord.

 This is a powerful spiritual practice. In the Bhagavad Gita, one of the
oldest and most beautiful spiritual teachings in existence,
nonattachment to the fruit of your action is called Karma Yoga. It is
described as the path of "consecrated action."
When the compulsive striving away from the Now ceases, the joy of
Being flows into everything you do. The moment your attention turns
to the Now, you feel a presence, a stillness, a peace. You no longer
depend on the future for fulfillment and satisfaction - you don’t look
to it for salvation. Therefore, you are not attached to the results.
Neither failure nor success has the power to change your inner state
of Being. You have found the life underneath your life situation.
In the absence of psychological time, your sense of self is derived
from Being, not from your personal past. Therefore, the psychological
need to become anything other than who you are already is no longer
there. In the world, on the level of your life situation, you may indeed
become wealthy, knowledgeable, successful, free of this or that, but
in the deeper dimension of Being you are complete and whole now.
In that state of wholeness, would we still be able or willing to pursue
external goals?
Of course, but you will not have illusory expectations that anything or
anybody in the future will save you or make you happy. As far as your
life situation is concerned, there may be things to be attained or
acquired. That’s the world of form, of gain and loss. Yet on a deeper
level you are already complete, and when you realize that, there is a
playful, joyous energy behind what you do. Being free of psychological
time, you no longer pursue your goals with grim determination, driven
by fear, anger, discontent, or the need to become someone. Nor will
you remain inactive through fear of failure, which to the ego is loss of
self. When your deeper sense of self is derived from Being, when you
are free of "becoming" as a psychological need, neither your
happiness nor your sense of self depends on the outcome, and so
there is freedom from fear. You don’t seek permanency where it
cannot be found: in the world of form, of gain and loss, birth and

 death. You don’t demand that situations, conditions, places, or people
should make you happy, and then suffer when they don’t live up to
your expectations.
Everything is honored, but nothing matters. Forms are born and die,
yet you are aware of the eternal underneath the forms. You know that
"nothing real can be threatened."3
When this is your state of Being, how can you not succeed? You have
succeeded already.
nner
purpose. After that, the outer purpose is just a game that you may
continue to play simply because you enjoy it. It is also possible to fail
completely in your outer purpose and at the same time totally
succeed in your inner purpose. Or the other way around, which is
actually more common: outer riches and inner poverty, or to "gain the
world and lose your soul," as Jesus puts it. Ultimately, of course,
every outer purpose is doomed to "fail" sooner or later, simply
because it is subject to the law of impermanence of all things. The
sooner you realize that your outer purpose cannot give you lasting
fulfillment, the better. When you have seen the limitations of your
outer purpose, you give up your unrealistic expectation that it should
make you happy, and you make it subservient to your inner purpose.
THE PAST CANNOT SURVIVE IN YOUR PRESENCE
You mentioned that thinking or talking about the past unnecessarily is
one of the ways in which we avoid the present. But apart from the
past that we remember and perhaps identify with, isn’t there another
level of past within us that is much more deep-seated? I am talking
about the unconscious past that conditions our lives, especially
through early childhood experiences, perhaps even past-life
experiences. And then there is our cultural conditioning, which has to
do with where we live geographically and the historical time period in
which we live. All these things determine how we see the world, how
we react, what we think, what kind of relationships we have, how we
live our lives. How could we ever become conscious of all that or get
rid of it? How long would that take? And even if we did, what would
there be left?
What is left when illusion ends?
There is no need to investigate the unconscious past in you except as
it manifests at this moment as a thought, an emotion, a desire, a

 reaction, or an external event that happens to you. Whatever you
need to know about the unconscious past in you, the challenges of the
present will bring it out. If you delve into the past, it will become a
bottomless pit: There is always more. You may think that you need
more time to understand the past or become free of it, in other words,
that the future will eventually free you of the past. This is a delusion.
Only the present can free you of the past. More time cannot free you
of time. Access the power of Now. That is the key.
What is the power of Now?
None other than the power of your presence, your consciousness
liberated from thought forms.
So deal with the past on the level of the present. The more attention
you give to the past, the more you energize it, and the more likely
you are to make a "self" out of it. Don’t misunderstand: Attention is
essential, but not to the past as past. Give attention to the present;
give attention to your behavior, to your reactions, moods, thoughts,
emotions, fears, and desires as they occur in the present. There’s the
past in you. If you can be present enough to watch all those things,
not critically or analytically but nonjudgmentally, then you are dealing
with the past and dissolving it through the power of your presence.
You cannot find yourself by going into the past. You find yourself by
coming into the present.
Isn’t it helpful to understand the past and so understand why we do
certain things, react in certain ways, or why we unconsciously create
our particular kind of drama, patterns in relationships, and so on?
As you become more conscious of your present reality, you may
suddenly get certain insights as to why your conditioning functions in
those particular ways - for example, why your relationships follow
certain patterns - and you may remember things that happened in
the past or see them more clearly. That is fine and can be helpful, but
it is not essential. What is essential is your conscious presence. That

 dissolves the past. That is the transformative agent. So don’t seek to
understand the past, but be as present as you can. The past cannot
survive in your presence. It can only survive in your absence.

THE STATE OF PRESENCE

IT’S NOT WHAT YOU THINK IT IS
You keep talking about the state of presence as the key. I think I
understand it intellectually, but I don’t know if I have ever truly
experienced it. I wonder - is it what I think it is, or is it something
entirely different?
It’s not what you think it is! You can’t think about presence, and the
mind can’t understand it. Understanding presence is being present.
Try a little experiment. Close your eyes and say to yourself: "I wonder
what my next thought is going to be." Then become very alert and
wait for the next thought. Be like a cat watching a mouse hole. What
thought is going to come out of the mouse hole? Try it now.

Well?
I had to wait for quite a long time before a thought came in.
Exactly. As long as you are in a state of intense presence, you are free
of thought. You are still, yet highly alert. The instant your conscious
attention sinks below a certain level, thought rushes in. The mental
noise returns; the stillness is lost. You are back in time.

 To test their degree of presence, some Zen masters have been known
to creep up on their students from behind and suddenly hit them with
a stick. Quite a shock! If the student had been fully present and in a
state of alertness, if he had "kept his loin girded and his lamp
burning," which is one of the analogies that Jesus uses for presence,
he would have noticed the master coming up from behind and
stopped him or stepped aside. But if he were hit, that would mean he
was immersed in thought, which is to say absent, unconscious.
To stay present in everyday life, it helps to be deeply rooted within
yourself; otherwise, the mind, which has incredible momentum, will
drag you along like a wild river.
What do you mean by "rooted within yourself"?
It means to inhabit your body fully. To always have some of your
attention in the inner energy field of your body. To feel the body from
within, so to speak. Body awareness keeps you present. It anchors
you in the Now (see chapter 6).
THE ESOTERIC MEANING OF "WAITING"
In a sense, the state of presence could be compared to waiting. Jesus
used the analogy of waiting in some of his parables. This is not the
usual bored or restless kind of waiting that is a denial of the present
and that I spoke about already. It is not a waiting in which your
attention is focused on some point in the future and the present is
perceived as an undesirable obstacle that prevents you from having
what you want. There is a qualitatively different kind of waiting, one
that requires your total alertness. Something could happen at any
moment, and if you are not absolutely awake, absolutely still, you will
miss it. This is the kind of waiting Jesus talks about. In that state, all
your attention is in the Now. There is none left for daydreaming,
thinking, remembering, anticipating. There is no tension in it, no fear,
just alert presence. You are present with your whole Being, with every
cell of your body. In that state, the "you" that has a past and a future

 - the personality, if you like - is hardly there anymore. And yet
nothing of value is lost. You are still essentially yourself. In fact, you
are more fully yourself than you ever were before, or rather it is only
now that you are truly yourself.
"Be like a servant waiting for the return of the master," says Jesus.
The servant does not know at what hour the master is going to come.
So he stays awake, alert, poised, still, lest he miss the master’s
arrival. In another parable, Jesus speaks of the five careless
(unconscious) women who do not have enough oil (consciousness) to
keep their lamps burning (stay present) and so miss the bridegroom
(the Now) and don’t get to the wedding feast (enlightenment). These
five stand in contrast to the five wise women who have enough oil
(stay conscious).
Even the men who wrote the Gospels did not understand the meaning
of these parables, so the first misinterpretations and distortions crept
in as they were written down. With subsequent erroneous
interpretations, the real meaning was completely lost. These are
parables not about the end of the world but about the end of
psychological time. They point to the transcendence of the egoic mind
and the possibility of living in an entirely new state of consciousness.
BEAUTY ARISES IN THE STILLNESS OF YOUR PRESENCE
What you have just described is something that I occasionally
experience for brief moments when I am alone and surrounded by
nature.
Yes. Zen masters use the word satori to describe a flash of insight, a
moment of no-mind and total presence. Although satori is not a
lasting transformation, be grateful when it comes, for it gives you a
taste of enlightenment. You may, indeed, have experienced it many
times without knowing what it is and realizing its importance.
Presence is needed to become aware of the beauty, the majesty, the
sacredness of nature. Have you ever gazed up into the infinity of

 space on a clear night, awestruck by the absolute stillness and
inconceivable vastness of it? Have you listened, truly listened, to the
sound of a mountain stream in the forest? Or to the song of a
blackbird at dusk on a quiet summer evening? To become aware of
such things, the mind needs to be still. You have to put down for a
moment your personal baggage of problems, of past and future, as
well as all your knowledge; otherwise, you will see but not see, hear
but not hear. Your total presence is required.
Beyond the beauty of the external forms, there is more here:
something that cannot be named, something ineffable, some deep,
inner, holy essence. Whenever and wherever there is beauty, this
inner essence shines through somehow. It only reveals itself to you
when you are present. Could it be that this nameless essence and
your presence are one and the same? Would it be there without your
presence? Go deeply into it. Find out for yourself.

When you experienced those moments of presence, you likely didn’t
realize that you were briefly in a state of nomind. This is because the
gap between that state and the influx of thought was too narrow.
Your satori may only have lasted for a few seconds before the mind
came in, but it was there; otherwise, you would not have experienced
the beauty. Mind can neither recognize nor create beauty. Only for a
few seconds, while you were completely present, was that beauty or
that sacredness there. Because of the narrowness of that gap and a
lack of vigilance and alertness on your part, you were probably unable
to see the fundamental difference between the perception, the
thoughtless awareness of beauty, and the naming and interpreting of
it as thought: The time gap was so small that it seemed to be a single
process. The truth is, however, that the moment thought came in, all
you had was a memory of it.
The wider the time gap between perception and thought, the more
depth there is to you as a human being, which is to say the more

 conscious you are.
Many people are so imprisoned in their minds that the beauty of
nature does not really exist for them. They might say, "What a pretty
flower," but that’s just a mechanical mental labeling. Because they
are not still, not present, they don’t truly see the flower, don’t feel its
essence, its holiness - just as they don’t know themselves, don’t feel
their own essence, their own holiness.
Because we live in such a mind-dominated culture, most modern art,
architecture, music, and literature are devoid of beauty, of inner
essence, with very few exceptions. The reason is that the people who
create those things cannot - even for a moment - free themselves
from their mind. So they are never in touch with that place within
where true creativity and beauty arise. The mind left to itself creates
monstrosities, and not only in art galleries. Look at our urban
landscapes and industrial wastelands. No civilization has ever
produced so much ugliness.
REALIZING PURE CONSCIOUSNESS
Is presence the same as Being?
When you become conscious of Being, what is really happening is that
Being becomes conscious of itself. When Being becomes conscious of
itself - that’s presence. Since Being, consciousness, and life are
synonymous, we could say that presence means consciousness
becoming conscious of itself, or life attaining self-consciousness. But
don’t get attached to the words, and don’t make an effort to
understand this. There is nothing that you need to understand before
you can become present.
I do understand what you just said, but it seems to imply that Being,
the ultimate transcendental reality, is not yet complete, that it is
undergoing a process of development. Does God need time for
personal growth?

 Yes, but only as seen from the limited perspective of the manifested
universe. In the Bible, God declares: "I am the Alpha and the Omega,
and I am the living One." In the timeless realm where God dwells,
which is also your home, the beginning and the end, the Alpha and
the Omega, are one, and the essence of everything that ever has
been and ever will be is eternally present in an unmanifested state of
oneness and perfection - totally beyond anything the human mind
can ever imagine or comprehend. In our world of seemingly separate
forms, however, timeless perfection is an inconceivable concept. Here
even consciousness, which is the light emanating from the eternal
Source, seems to be subject to a process of development, but this is
due to our limited perception. It is not so in absolute terms.
Nevertheless, let me continue to speak for a moment about the
evolution of consciousness in this world.
Everything that exists has Being, has God-essence, has some degree
of consciousness. Even a stone has rudimentary consciousness;
otherwise, it would not be, and its atoms and molecules would
disperse. Everything is alive. The sun, the earth, plants, animals,
humans - all are expressions of consciousness in varying degrees,
consciousness manifesting as form.
The world arises when consciousness takes on shapes and forms,
thought forms and material forms. Look at the millions of life forms on
this planet alone. In the sea, on land, in the air - and then each life
form is replicated millions of times. To what end? Is someone or
something playing a game, a game with form? This is what the
ancient seers of India asked themselves. They saw the world as lila, a
kind of divine game that God is playing. The individual life forms are
obviously not very important in this game. In the sea, most life forms
don’t survive for more than a few minutes after being born. The
human form turns to dust pretty quickly too, and when it is gone it is
as if it had never been. Is that tragic or cruel? Only if you create a
separate identity for each form, if you forget that its consciousness is
God-essence expressing itself in form. But you don’t truly know that
until you realize your own God-essence as pure consciousness.

 If a fish is born in your aquarium and you call him John, write out a
birth certificate, tell him about his family history, and two minutes
later he gets eaten by another fish - that’s tragic. But it’s only tragic
because you projected a separate self where there was none. You got
hold of a fraction of a dynamic process, a molecular dance, and made
a separate entity out of it.
Consciousness takes on the disguise of forms until they reach such
complexity that it completely loses itself in them. In present-day
humans, consciousness is completely identified with its disguise. It
only knows itself as form and therefore lives in fear of the annihilation
of its physical or psychological form. This is the egoic mind, and this is
where considerable dysfunction sets in. It now looks as if something
had gone very wrong somewhere along the line of evolution. But even
this is part of lila, the divine game. Finally, the pressure of suffering
created by this apparent dysfunction forces consciousness to
disidentify from form and awakens it from its dream of form: It
regains self-consciousness, but it is at a far deeper level than when it
lost it.
This process is explained by Jesus in his parable of the lost son, who
leaves his father’s home, squanders his wealth, becomes destitute,
and is then forced by his suffering to return home. When he does, his
father loves him more than before. The son’s state is the same as it
was before, yet not the same. It has an added dimension of depth.
The parable describes a journey from unconscious perfection, through
apparent imperfection and "evil" to conscious perfection.
Can you now see the deeper and wider significance of becoming
present as the watcher of your mind? Whenever you watch the mind,
you withdraw consciousness from mind forms, and it then becomes
what we call the watcher or the witness. Consequently, the watcher
- pure consciousness beyond form - becomes stronger, and the
mental formations become weaker. When we talk about watching the
mind we are personalizing an event that is truly of cosmic
significance: Through you, consciousness is awakening out of its
dream of identification with form and withdrawing from form. This

 foreshadows, but is already part of, an event that is probably still in
the distant future as far as chronological time is concerned. The event
is called - the end of the world.

When consciousness frees itself from its identification with physical
and mental forms, it becomes what we may call pure or enlightened
consciousness, or presence. This has already happened in a few
individuals, and it seems destined to happen soon on a much larger
scale, although there is no absolute guarantee that it will happen.
Most humans are still in the grip of the egoic mode of consciousness:
identified with their mind and run by their mind. If they do not free
themselves from their mind in time, they will be destroyed by it. They
will experience increasing confusion, conflict, violence, illness, despair,
madness. Egoic mind has become like a sinking ship. If you don’t get
off, you will go down with it. The collective egoic mind is the most
dangerously insane and destructive entity ever to inhabit this planet.
What do you think will happen on this planet if human consciousness
remains unchanged?
Already for most humans, the only respite they find from their own
minds is to occasionally revert to a level of consciousness below
thought. Everyone does that every night during sleep. But this also
happens to some extent through sex, alcohol, and other drugs that
suppress excessive mind activity. If it weren’t for alcohol,
tranquilizers, antidepressants, as well as the illegal drugs, which are
all consumed in vast quantities, the insanity of the human mind would
become even more glaringly obvious than it is already. I believe that,
if deprived of their drugs, a large part of the population would become
a danger to themselves and others. These drugs, of course, simply
keep you stuck in dysfunction. Their widespread use only delays the
breakdown of the old mind structures and the emergence of higher
consciousness. While individual users may get some relief from the
daily torture inflicted on them by their minds, they are prevented from
generating enough conscious presence to rise above thought and so

 find true liberation.
Falling back to a level of consciousness below mind, which is the prethinking level of our distant ancestors and of animals and plants, is
not an option for us. There is no way back. If the human race is to
survive, it will have to go on to the next stage. Consciousness is
evolving throughout the universe in billions of forms. So even if we
didn’t make it, this wouldn’t matter on a cosmic scale. No gain in
consciousness is ever lost, so it would simply express itself through
some other form. But the very fact that I am speaking here and you
are listening or reading this is a clear sign that the new consciousness
is gaining a foothold on the planet.
There is nothing personal in this: I am not teaching you. You are
consciousness, and you are listening to yourself. There is an Eastern
saying: "The teacher and the taught together create the teaching." In
any case, the words in themselves are not important. They are not
the Truth; they only point to it. I speak from presence, and as I speak,
you may be able to join me in that state. Although every word that I
use has a history, of course, and comes from the past, as all language
does, the words that I speak to you now are carriers of the highenergy frequency of presence, quite apart from the meaning they
convey as words.
Silence is an even more potent carrier of presence, so when you read
this or listen to me speak, be aware of the silence between and
underneath the words. Be aware of the gaps. To listen to the silence,
wherever you are, is an easy and direct way of becoming present.
Even if there is noise, there is always some silence underneath and in
between the sounds. Listening to the silence immediately creates
stillness inside you. Only the stillness in you can perceive the silence
outside. And what is stillness other than presence, consciousness
freed from thought forms? Here is the living realization of what we
have been talking about.

Don’t get attached to any one word. You can substitute "Christ" for
presence, if that is more meaningful to you. Christ is your Godessence or the Self, as it is sometimes called in the East. The only
difference between Christ and presence is that Christ refers to your
indwelling divinity regardless of whether you are conscious of it or
not, whereas presence means your awakened divinity or God-essence.
Many misunderstandings and false beliefs about Christ will clear if you
realize that there is no past or future in Christ. To say that Christ was
or will be is a contradiction in terms. Jesus was. He was a man who
lived two thousand years ago and realized divine presence, his true
nature. And so he said: "Before Abraham was, I am." He did not say:
"I already existed before Abraham was born." That would have meant
that he was still within the dimension of time and form identity. The
words I am used in a sentence that starts in the past tense indicate a
radical shift, a discontinuity in the temporal dimension. It is a Zen-like
statement of great profundity. Jesus attempted to convey directly, not
through discursive thought, the meaning of presence, of selfrealization. He had gone beyond the consciousness dimension
governed by time, into the realm of the timeless. The dimension of
eternity had come into this world. Eternity, of course, does not mean
endless time, but no time. Thus, the man Jesus became Christ, a
vehicle for pure consciousness. And what is God’s self-definition in the
Bible? Did God say, "I have always been, and I always will be?" Of
course not. That would have given reality to past and future. God
said: "I AM THAT I AM." No time here, just presence.
The "second coming" of Christ is a transformation of human
consciousness, a shift from time to presence, from thinking to pure
consciousness, not the arrival of some man or woman. If "Christ" were
to return tomorrow in some externalized form, what could he or she
possibly say to you other than this: "I am the Truth. I am divine
presence. I am eternal life. I am within you. I am here. I am Now."

Never Outshine the Master
Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. In your desire to please or impress them, do
not go too far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish the opposite – inspire fear and
insecurity. Make your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights of
power.
Never put too Much Trust in Friends, Learn how to use Enemies
Be wary of friends-they will betray you more quickly, for they are easily aroused to envy. They also
become spoiled and tyrannical. But hire a former enemy and he will be more loyal than a friend, because
he has more to prove. In fact, you have more to fear from friends than from enemies. If you have no
enemies, find a way to make them.
Conceal your Intentions
Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. If they have
no clue what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense. Guide them far enough down the wrong path,
envelope them in enough smoke, and by the time they realize your intentions, it will be too late.
Always Say Less than Necessary
When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more common you appear, and
the less in control. Even if you are saying something banal, it will seem original if you make it vague,
open-ended, and sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by saying less. The more you say,
the more likely you are to say something foolish.
So Much Depends on Reputation – Guard it with your Life
Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win; once you
slip, however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all sides. Make your reputation unassailable.
Always be alert to potential attacks and thwart them before they happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy
your enemies by opening holes in their own reputations. Then stand aside and let public opinion hang
them.
Court Attention at all Cost
Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in
the crowd, then, or buried in oblivion. Stand out. Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make yourself a magnet
of attention by appearing larger, more colorful, more mysterious, than the bland and timid masses.
Get others to do the Work for you, but Always Take the Credit
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people to further your own cause. Not only will such
assistance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura of efficiency and speed. In
the end your helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembered. Never do yourself what others can
do for you.
Make other People come to you – use Bait if Necessary
When you force the other person to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make your
opponent come to you, abandoning his own plans in the process. Lure him with fabulous gains – then
attack. You hold the cards.
Win through your Actions, Never through Argument
Any momentary triumph you think gained through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The resentment
and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change of opinion. It is much
more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without saying a word.
Demonstrate, do not explicate.
Infection: Avoid the Unhappy and Unlucky
You can die from someone else’s misery – emotional states are as infectious as disease. You may feel
you are helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own disaster. The unfortunate
sometimes draw misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. Associate with the happy and
fortunate instead.
Learn to Keep People Dependent on You
To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the
more freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their happiness and prosperity and you have
nothing to fear. Never teach them enough so that they can do without you.
Use Selective Honesty and Generosity to Disarm your Victim
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. Open-hearted gestures of
honesty and generosity bring down the guard of even the most suspicious people. Once your selective
honesty opens a hole in their armor, you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A timely gift – a
Trojan horse – will serve the same purpose.
When Asking for Help, Appeal to People’s Self-Interest,
Never to their Mercy or Gratitude
If you need to turn to an ally for help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistance and good
deeds. He will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in your alliance
with him, that will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion. He will respond enthusiastically
when he sees something to be gained for himself.
Pose as a Friend, Work as a Spy
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you a step
ahead. Better still: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask indirect
questions to get people to reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion that is not an
opportunity for artful spying.
Crush your Enemy Totally
All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes
they have learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left alight, no matter how dimly it smolders, a fire
will eventually break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through total annihilation: The
enemy will recover, and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit.
Use Absence to Increase Respect and Honor
Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heard from, the more
common you appear. If you are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from it will make
you more talked about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create value through
scarcity.
Keep Others in Suspended Terror: Cultivate an Air of Unpredictability
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in other people’s actions. Your
predictability gives them a sense of control. Turn the tables: Be deliberately unpredictable. Behavior
that seems to have no consistency or purpose will keep them off-balance, and they will wear themselves
out trying to explain your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strategy can intimidate and terrorize.
Do Not Build Fortresses to Protect Yourself – Isolation is Dangerous
The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere – everyone has to protect themselves. A fortress
seems the safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you from – it cuts you off
from valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to circulate among
people find allies, mingle. You are shielded from your enemies by the crowd.
Know Who You’re Dealing with – Do Not Offend the Wrong Person
There are many different kinds of people in the world, and you can never assume that everyone will react
to your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver some people and they will spend the rest of
their lives seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose your victims and opponents
carefully, then – never offend or deceive the wrong person.
Do Not Commit to Anyone
It is the fool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yourself. By
maintaining your independence, you become the master of others – playing people against one another,
making them pursue you.
Play a Sucker to Catch a Sucker – Seem Dumber than your Mark
No one likes feeling stupider than the next persons. The trick, is to make your victims feel smart – and
not just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced of this, they will never suspect that you may
have ulterior motives.
Use the Surrender Tactic: Transform Weakness into Power
When you are weaker, never fight for honor’s sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives you time
to recover, time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait for his power to wane. Do not give
him the satisfaction of fighting and defeating you – surrender first. By turning the other check you
infuriate and unsettle him. Make surrender a tool of power.
Concentrate Your Forces
Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them concentrated at their strongest point. You gain more
by finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than by flitting from one shallow mine to another – intensity
defeats extensity every time. When looking for sources of power to elevate you, find the one key patron,
the fat cow who will give you milk for a long time to come.
Play the Perfect Courtier
The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political dexterity.
He has mastered the art of indirection; he flatters, yields to superiors, and asserts power over others in the
mot oblique and graceful manner. Learn and apply the laws of courtiership and there will be no limit to
how far you can rise in the court.
Re-Create Yourself
Do not accept the roles that society foists on you. Re-create yourself by forging a new identity, one that
commands attention and never bores the audience. Be the master of your own image rather than letting
others define if for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your public gestures and actions – your power
will be enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.
Keep Your Hands Clean
You must seem a paragon of civility and efficiency: Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and nasty
deeds. Maintain such a spotless appearance by using others as scapegoats and cat’s-paws to disguise
your involvement.
Play on People’s Need to Believe to Create a Cultlike Following
People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such desire by
offering them a cause, a new faith to follow. Keep your words vague but full of promise; emphasize
enthusiasm over rationality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rituals to perform, ask them to
make sacrifices on your behalf. In the absence of organized religion and grand causes, your new belief
system will bring you untold power.
Enter Action with Boldness
If you are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect your
execution. Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit through
audacity are easily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the timid.
Plan All the Way to the End
The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible consequences,
obstacles, and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and give the glory to others. By
planning to the end you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to stop.
Gently guide fortune and help determine the future by thinking far ahead.

Make your Accomplishments Seem Effortless
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into them, and
also all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act effortlessly, as if you could do much
more. Avoid the temptation of revealing how hard you work – it only raises questions. Teach no one
your tricks or they will be used against you.
Control the Options: Get Others to Play with the Cards you Deal
The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victims feel they are
in control, but are actually your puppets. Give people options that come out in your favor whichever one
they choose. Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils, both of which serve your
purpose. Put them on the horns of a dilemma: They are gored wherever they turn.
Play to People’s Fantasies
The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you
are prepared for the anger that comes for disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people
who can manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are like oases in the desert: Everyone flocks to
them. There is great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses.
Discover Each Man’s Thumbscrew
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usual y an insecurity, an
uncontrollable emotion or need; it can also be a small secret pleasure. Either way, once found, it is a
thumbscrew you can turn to your advantage.
Be Royal in your Own Fashion: Act like a King to be treated like one
The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated; In the long run, appearing vulgar
or common will make people disrespect you. For a king respects himself and inspires the same sentiment
in others. By acting regally and confident of your powers, you make yourself seem destined to wear a
crown.
Master the Art of Timing
Never seem to be in a hurry – hurrying betrays a lack of control over yourself, and over time. Always
seem patient, as if you know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a detective of the
right moment; sniff out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to power. Learn to stand
back when the time is not yet ripe, and to strike fiercely when it has reached fruition.

Disdain Things you cannot have: Ignoring them is the best Revenge
By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you pay an
enemy, the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more visible when you
try to fix it. It is sometimes best to leave things alone. If there is something you want but cannot have,
show contempt for it. The less interest you reveal, the more superior you seem.
Create Compelling Spectacles
Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura of power – everyone responds to them.
Stage spectacles for those around you, then full of arresting visuals and radiant symbols that heighten
your presence. Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really doing.
Think as you like but Behave like others
If you make a show of going against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and unorthodox
ways, people will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon them. They will find a
way to punish you for making them feel inferior. It is far safer to blend in and nurture the common
touch. Share your originality only with tolerant friends and those who are sure to appreciate your
uniqueness.
Stir up Waters to Catch Fish
Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and objective. But if
you can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself, you gain a decided advantage. Put your
enemies off-balance: Find the chink in their vanity through which you can rattle them and you hold the
strings.
Despise the Free Lunch
What is offered for free is dangerous – it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation. What has
worth is worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay clear of gratitude, guilt, and deceit. It is
also often wise to pay the full price – there is no cutting corners with excellence. Be lavish with your
money and keep it circulating, for generosity is a sign and a magnet for power.
Avoid Stepping into a Great Man’s Shoes
What happens first always appears better and more original than what comes after. If you succeed a
great man or have a famous parent, you will have to accomplish double their achievements to outshine
them. Do not get lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not of your own making: Establish your own

name and identity by changing course. Slay the overbearing father, disparage his legacy, and gain power
by shining in your own way.
Strike the Shepherd and the Sheep will Scatter
Trouble can often be traced to a single strong individual – the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the poisoned
of goodwill. If you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their influence. Do not
wait for the troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them – they are irredeemable.
Neutralize their influence by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source of the trouble and the
sheep will scatter.
Work on the Hearts and Minds of Others
Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into wanting
to move in your direction. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce
others is to operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses. Soften up the resistant by working
on their emotions, playing on what they hold dear and what they fear. Ignore the hearts and minds of
others and they will grow to hate you.
Disarm and Infuriate with the Mirror Effect
The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect tool for deception: When you mirror your enemies,
doing exactly as they do, they cannot figure out your strategy. The Mirror Effect mocks and humiliates
them, making them overreact. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, you seduce them with the illusion
that you share their values; by holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can
resist the power of Mirror Effect.
Preach the Need for Change, but Never Reform too much at Once
Everyone understands the need for change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people are
creatures of habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. If you are new to a position
of power, or an outsider trying to build a power base, make a show of respecting the old way of doing
things. If change is necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the past.
Never appear too Perfect
Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but most dangerous of all is to appear to have no faults
or weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, and admit to
harmless vices, in order to deflect envy and appear more human and approachable. Only gods and the
dead can seem perfect with impunity.
Do not go Past the Mark you Aimed for; In Victory, Learn when to Stop
The moment of victory is often the moment of greatest peril. In the heat of victory, arrogance and
overconfidence can push you past the goal you had aimed for, and by going too far, you make more
enemies than you defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no substitute for strategy and
careful planning. Set a goal, and when you reach it, stop.
By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack. Instead of taking a form for
your enemy to grasp, keep yourself adaptable and on the move. Accept the fact that nothing is certain
and no law is fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid and formless as water; never bet on
stability or lasting order. Everything changes.


